---
title: Why I paint my nails
draft: false
date: 2025-06-25
tags:
  - masculinity
  - parenting
---
So I paint my nails sometimes. My favorite color to use is a deep purple. I’m still leaning how to actually make it look good, how to not ruin it immediately, or how to do it without basically dunking my finger in the paint, but it warms my little emo heart to see the colors on the tips of my fingers. One day I’ll have the guts to do a full rainbow for a pride month I support of the queer folks I have in my life, but I’m not quite there yet. 

Why I'm not there yet is likely a story that involves so much depth and history that I don’t even know how to dig deep into, but the most basic and surface level conversation to be had would be toxic masculinity. The brand of masculinity that I grew up is this blend of Mormonism/christianity, southern, and military. Each of these presents ideas about what men ought to be and how they should act. They defined bounderies around what is okay and what is not. 

The military is probably the one that affected me the least, but my dad served in the US Air Force for 24 years. His dad also served in the USAF during the Vietnam War. My maternal grandfather served in the army during World War II. I live in a city that neighbors an air force base. The military has a very strict dress code. It has rules around what kind of body modifications you are allowed to have. There’s a stigma around being gay in the military. So, while I never experienced those things directly, the culture leaks out into the world around me. 

For example, my dad really did not want me to have long hair as a pre-teen and teenager, but he got called out on his hypocrisy when we pulled out his 8th grade yearbook (from the late 1970s) and gave up the fight as he stated at his center part covering his ears. He had his ideas about how a man should dress, and wanted me to follow that mold. In addition to the hair, he would also give me crap about the skinny jeans, the bracelets, and accessories I would wear in high school. (Yes, we’ve already established I was a little emo kid.) Mike if these things were things he would be allowed to wear, and while I don’t entirely blame it on the Air Force, I can’t help but assume it played a large role. 

As a military kid, we had our fair share of moves. We moved to North Carolina right as I was starting high school. Those critical years were we are forming our identity and self expression were had in rural America, where I would drive past corn fields, and tobacco plants daily as I went to go hang out with my friends. We were in farming country. So much so that my mom’s parents were farmers who raised turkeys. My mom never enforced any sort of ideas of masculinity on me — frankly, neither of my parents did — but there was a deep culture of tough farmer, hunting men, and mechanical blue collar labor surrounding every aspect of my high school, experience that came with an endless wealth of stereotypes. 

I’ve always struggled to understand the appeal of hunting for sport. I’ve also never really been that into guns. Depending on my mood, I get a little grossed out dealing with raw meat (yay ‘tism). So I’m not surprised when I realized I don’t really like the idea of hunting. I’m obviously not going to stop someone from doing their fun thing, but it’s definitely not for me; It’s not an experience I’m going to seek out, or prepare for, or engage in. I’d probably pass it up even offered. I’ll go skeet shooting with you, but don’t ask me to sit in a box in the woods, waiting for an animal to pass by just so I can shoot it. If I’m going out into the woods, it’s so that I can hike through the trees, check out a waterfall, stand at the top of a cliff or admire a canyon. I’d much prefer to float down a river in a kayak than sit in a boat and fish. I’ve never felt this need or desire to dominate nature that feels prevalent in the south’s attempt to smooth everything with oil and gas and gunpowder, and that definitely made me stand out among my peers. 

Luckily I had a lot of friends that weren’t into hunting, and trucks, and lift kids, and 4-wheelers, but instead were into Anime, Yu-Gi-Oh cards, video games, and hard-style techno and screamo music. However, this was all antithetical to my upbringing in Mormonism. While the Mormon view of Masculinity is definitely much softer than that of the military and the south, it was absolutely just as restrictive. It tried to pass off a much more business-class stoicism brand of masculinity when compared to either of the brands I’ve already discussed. One where the man is this spiritually in tune. A man who is always in control of his feelings can lead the home and make guiding decisions in the best interest of his family. A (modern) foundational text coming out of Mormonism is “The Family: A Procolmation to the World.” In it, we see the following: 

> By define design, fathers are to preside over their families in love and righteousness and are responsible to provide the necessities of life and protection for their families. 

This language is fine and all, but what is said gets to be interpreted in many ways by the individuals of a given group. In my circles, this turned into ideas like:
* I have to be a job holder and make lots of money for my family. 
* I have to be ready to fight other people who threaten my family or property. 
* I have to understand the doctrine and make sure my family is following the same interpretations as my religious beliefs. 

Just as restrictive is actually the things that were *not allowed* because they were in the domain of women and mothers. 

> Mothers are primarily responsible for the nurture of their children.

When I think of the word “nurture”, I picture other words like affection, caring, soft, and loving. Once again, there is nothing in the text of The Family that restricts me as a man and a father from being able to act in any of the ways I’ve just described, however, the words of the text once again get interpreted, and the social pressures start to build. Men who don’t dress in the way the (Mormon) Church expects are left out of opportunities. Men who are a little bit feminine are looked down on and are immediately assumed to be gay, which is a huge thing in the church. Men who do not have steady jobs or who act as stay-at-home dads are considered to be less of a man as their wife is the that is the provider for the home. In an environment like that, how could I ever consider painting my nails? Or wearing a crop top? Or having piercings? Or short shirts, or an open top? All of these things are seen as gay or rebellious within the culture of the Mormon church, and within the Mormon church, gay is seen as opposite to masculine as you can get. 

I have since let myself do all those things since leaving the church. I’ve had several years to let myself deconstruct the ideas presented to me over the first 30 years of my life. I’ve been asking things like 
- What makes a man masculine? 
- What makes a man gay? 
- What makes a man good or evil? 
- What makes a man healthy? 
- What makes a man? 

Immediately following those questions became
* What ways do I show masculinity? 
* How do I show more healthy forms of masculinity? 
* What does it take to be a good person? 
* How do I heal? 
* What am I and what do I want to be? 

I have answered enough of those questions for myself. I has lead me to presenting myself with a longer beard, short hair that i sometimes style, one hoop earring in each that I would like to trade out for larger colorful ones if I ever get the guts to deal with the weight, 5 inch inseam shorts that ended up being my favorite, mostly T-shirts with the occasional button down shirt with the top 3 buttons open to be real slutty, Teva sandals, the a necklace pretty much every day, and most importantly, my gold wedding band that I wear as often as I can remember (blasted ADHD and a global pandemic). This is my version of Masculine presentation and I love it. Sometimes I’ll paint my nails if I feel like having a little bigger splash of color.

A more important aspect of masculinity to me pertains to how I act with myself and around others. I have accepted a mix of Nihilism and Stoicism for how I carry myself through life. From Stoicism, I have learned through Cognitive Behavioral therapy to attempt to question the reasons I’m having a certain reaction. Get down to the root cause of why I’m emotionally responding like this, and see if I need to correct that emotion. Where I disagree with Stoicism is in the need to always be in control of my emotional composure. If a certain overwhelming emotion is warranted, I let it show. 

This past week has given perfectly contrasting examples of what I mean. Within the last week of writing this article, Donald Trump and his administration has decided that it is a good idea to bomb Iran in an attempt to destroy assumed nuclear sites. I had already been extremely frustrated with the actions of the second Trump Administration for all the shit they’ve been doing over the last 5 months, but I was feeling a fresh wave of renewed anger because of this action. However, I’ve maintained control over that anger as there is nobody in my vicinity that is worthy of receiving that anger: I’m not going to take that rage out on my wife and kids, as they are not the ones that deserve that treatment. So I find other ways of letting out that anger that is non destructive. On the opposite end of the spectrum, I was reading a book with my children as a part of our bedtime routine. The book called [Witch Hazel](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/58064779-witch-hazel) by Molly Idle tells a story of grief, loss, and rejoicing In the joys of life. I cried uncontrollably in front of both my children as I thought of my own grandparents. Stories I have with them have been on my mind a lot since [writing about my journey with my own emotions and feelings](Feelings) recently. In this moment, I couldn’t stop the tears. I couldn’t speak in a controlled voice. I let myself sob in front of them (I’m talking almost ugly cry over here). They were concerned as to why I was crying, and I was able to explain to them in a bit more precise detail how the story brought up memories, and how that can sometimes feel sad to us after people we love have died. I was able to show my son and daughter how a man is able to feel sadness and grief over the loss of a close and loved family member without turning it into anger or violence. They are continuing to see their dad move on through his days sober, calm, and collected, even though I still feel that loss whenever I think or write about my grandfather. This is the positive masculinity I’m able to pull out of my understanding of the world and philosophy of stoicism. 

As for Nihilism, I’ve been reading [The Sunny Nihilist](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/58506039-the-sunny-nihilist) by Wendy Syfret, and I’ve been connecting with the ideas she has around letting the meaningless of everything push you to enjoying the moment you’re in. Instead of constantly striving to find the meaning of everything, just shut up and pet a dog. This has allowed me to stay more present. Let me enjoy the moment with my kids. It has let me stop reading into the meaning of the earring types and placements and whether or not I’m singling to the world that I’m gay is some subtle way. I’ve never kissed or fucked a dude or even wanted to for that matter. That’s enough for me. I don’t have enough time on this earth to stress about what you think in regards to my masculinity. I’m learning to present and act in the way that I want because that’s what makes me happy and that’s all I really can do in this life is make myself happy. 

At the end of the day, people will still try to put you into a little box. They will try to say you have to follow a rule book and check off all the boxes to be considered Maculine. That list will change depending on the people you associate and the area you grow up in. Please don’t let other people define who you are. Try things that may be outside of the boundaries of what you were told was okay. I never thought I would like shorts that showed my thighs, and here we are. I hated the idea of showing off my shoulders, but sometimes, a tank top is the most comfortable shirt ever. My earrings were a form of rebellion and marking myself as different from the religion that I left and the rules it had established for me, and I wouldn’t take them out for a second, even if they make my aunt from Texas or my wife’s friends see me as gay. As long as it’s not hateful or hurtful, I hope you can forge your own representation of what masculinity is for you and yours. 